Prosecutor Kerim Hahn,
welcome to the program.
Thank you for having me.
And of course, we're here at the ICC.
You are today
announcing that you are applying
for arrest warrants
for top military and political leadership
in the Israel Gaza war
since the October 7th events.
First and foremost, explain to me exactly
what you're asking for and who you are
charging today.
Christiane, we've applied for warrants
to the pretrial chamber
of the International Criminal Court
in relation to three individuals
that are Hamas members,
Sinwar, who's in charge on the ground?
That's Yahya Sinwar. Absolutely.
Deif,
who's in charge of the custom Brigade.
And Haniya,
who's one of their political bureau
based in Doha.
Let me just for everybody to understand,
Yassin was the head of what they call
the Islamic Resistance
movement, Hamas,
the military operation,
or even even wider.
Mohammad Dhiab, Ibrahim
al Masri, otherwise known as Dave,
commander in chief of the Military Wings
al-Hassan Brigade,
and Ismail Haniyeh, head of the Hamas
political bureau.
What are the charges?
The charges are extermination, murder,
taking of hostages,
rape and sexual assault in detention.
So these are the key
crimes that are alleged
to have been committed
by these two individuals.
The world was shocked
on the 7th of October
when people were ripped
from their bedrooms, from their homes,
from the different kibbutzim in Israel.
And people have suffered enormously.
And we have a variety of evidence
to support the applications
that we've submitted to the judges.
And just tell us what the evidence is.
Obviously,
the world has seen the real time images.
The Israeli government
has put out videos
which it said to the UN and others
journalists about what happened.
There are body cams on many of the Hamas
fighters, whoever was there at the time.
Is that the evidence or do you have more?
We have more.
We have
authenticated videos and photographs.
We have CCTV
camera pictures.
We have eyewitness evidence.
We have evidence of survivors.
I mean, it is remarkable
the victims and survivors
that have from Israel
that have engaged with my office
have this
righteous demand for justice
and accountability. They've come here.
I've also met them
in the different kibbutzim, and they want
justice and accountability.
So we have expert evidence.
So there's a whole variety of information
that we have authenticated
that we think is relevant and probative.
And that is sufficient,
we say, to sustain the
the crimes
that we put forward to the judges.
You have also issued warrants
against the top political
and military
leadership of the government
of the state of Israel.
We've applied for warrants.
Of course,
the judges must determine
whether or not to issue them.
But we've applied today
will apply for warrants
for Prime Minister Netanyahu
and also Minister of Defense Galant
for crimes of
causing
extermination and causing starvation
as a method of war,
including the denial
of humanitarian relief supplies,
deliberately targeting
civilians in in conflict.
And
the sad thing really is in relation
to both categories,
I have been saying repeatedly
in
Cairo in October last year at the Rafah
crossing
on Israeli television in Ramallah,
everywhere I can to the parties,
to the conflict,
complain now, don't complain later.
And of course, hostages
have not been released.
That insidious crime continues
for so many innocent Israelis
that are in custody,
you know, held hostage
by Hamas and families
that are waiting for their return.
And of course, we see pictures
of starving children,
of emaciated children.
We have a variety of evidence to support,
not polemics, but evidence
that's been forensically analyzed
to sustain the charge
also of starvation
being used by Netanyahu and Galant
as a method of war.
And it's awful that in 2024,
we have had to submit these applications
to the judges of the ICC for warrants.
I'm going to get into starvation
as a weapon of war in a moment.
But first, I want to ask you.
The word genocide
has been used by both sides
and many believe that genocide
is being committed.
But you do not
you're not using that word.
Well,
this is an active investigation
and we have a
criminal charges
that we can use genocide,
war crimes and crimes against humanity
in relation to this current stage
of investigations.
The charges
that we have put forward to the judges
do not include genocide,
but we are continuing to investigate.
It's a very complex situation.
We have not been allowed access into Gaza
by the Israeli authorities.
We are also continuing our investigations
in relation to the Hamas attacks.
And if and when the evidence points us
in a particular direction,
we will not hesitate to act.
So it's still an active investigation.
But yes, today we haven't.
What is extermination? It's mass killing.
Different than genocide.
Yes.
Genocide is defined by specific intent,
not only killing, but an intention
to destroy the group in whole
or in part to be suspiciously content,
to destroy the group in whole or in part.
So we're not
we have not
included in our application today
a request for warrants
for the crime of genocide.
So extermination, war
crimes, crimes against humanity.
I want to ask you about starvation,
because although it was accepted
by the ICC as a war crime
when you were created in 1998,
I don't believe it's ever
been prosecuted
before as a weapon of war.
No, it's not that I'm aware of.
I think, unfortunately,
this situation will be a first.
And it's very unusual.
We see a population,
large numbers of children and women
that have already endured
more than 17 years of a very rigid regime
of allowing goods into Gaza.
I think even in 2022, the United Nations
and others said
that 80% of the population,
you know,
lived on humanitarian supplies.
And that's just become
even more pernicious
since the 8th of October
with all the other restrictions.
And,
you know,
the words
of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, of the head
of the Office
of Coordination, of Humanitarian
Humanitarian Affairs, Martin Griffiths,
W.H.O., UNICEF.
I mean, it seems everybody
in the international firmament
has spoken with grave concern.
A extreme concern,
but we haven't seen food,
water, medicines
go to the most vulnerable.
And they have those rights
not because of
something that I'm saying
it's because it's required
in the Geneva Conventions
and it's required in the Rome Statute.
So as of April 17th,
according to humanitarian organizations
and the authorities,
whatever exist on the ground in Gaza,
28 children under 12 have died,
including 12 babies
about a month old,
because of malnutrition related
conditions.
The defense minister, you
have Galland,
who today
you are issuing an arrest warrant
or the request for an arrest warrant
for said on October 9th,
two days after October 7th.
We are imposing a complete siege.
There will be no electricity,
no food, no water, no fuel.
Everything is closed.
We are fighting human animals
and we will act accordingly.
Prime Minister
Netanyahu on October
13th said We will exact a price
that will be remembered by them
and Israel's
other enemies for decades to come.
Are those is that the basis
on which you establish intent,
or is that what is that
much of your evidence?
Much more than that.
But yes,
some of the words
uttered by the two individuals,
Minister of Defense Gallant
and Prime Minister Netanyahu,
are, of course, probative and relevant.
The fact that so many other individuals
have said, you know, words like there's
no such thing
as an innocent civilian in Gaza.
They're all responsible.
The words
by members of the security committee.
I mean, there's a whole variety of words
that are said and done by the government
that have not been disowned,
that have not been
denied, that have not that
they do to individuals,
have not disassociated themselves from.
And I think that's relevant.
But it's again, it's
a very complex operation.
It's not just the denial of aid.
It's the fact that as an occupying power,
Israel has an affirmative obligation
to make sure food and the objects
indispensable to survival
get to the civilians,
have an affirmative obligation
that in control of the north of Gaza,
for example, IDF tanks are in situ.
They could guard
aid convoys going in
and making sure it goes to the camps.
They're not doing that.
But in addition, one
has to look at a wider aspect.
Water has been cut off.
Electricity
has been plants have been
either destroyed or targeted.
Fuel can't go in.
Desalination
plants are completely dysfunctional.
There's no
desalination plant in the north of Gaza
at all.
Water purification tablets,
filtration systems have been classified
as dual use
objects, as have incubators,
as has oxygen for hospital,
as have anesthetics.
One sees
90% of all the greenhouses
in the north of Gaza destroyed 40% of
the land that was used for agriculture
has been destroyed since
the conflict started.
70% of the fishing vessels,
I mean, every avenue
that is so important to human survival
has been constrained
or suffocated because of a policy.
And the words of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations,
which said we're at breaking point.
The words of UNICEF, the words of UNWRA,
saying that we've got a trickle of aid
in a sea of need, all of these, you know,
giants of the international system,
their words, that concerns
have been put to one side,
unfortunately, in the face of
other imperatives.
And what seems to be a bit also filth,
the collective punishment of the
people of Gaza.
What is the international law
on the restrictions
that you're talking about
and for instance,
the checking of aid convoys?
The Israeli government says
it is at war with a terror organization
and has worked in coordination
with the US, Egypt
and international aid agencies
to get aid in.
Netanyahu himself, on October 29th,
after two weeks of nothing getting in
another week
later said we must prevent
a humanitarian disaster.
What do you make of those words
and what is the law
on stopping and checking aid convoys?
See, we have to look at words
and analyze them against
what is taking place.
Prime Minister
Netanyahu has been on the record
to say that
the access of humanitarian aid
gives Israel important leeway
that is being used.
Have talked about a diplomatic
iron dome as part of,
you know,
allowing aid in and not allowing aid
and all the rest of it.
Israel has every right
not to give succor to Hamas.
That is not contested.
Israel has every right
and did
an obligation to get hostages back.
But you must do so
by complying with the law.
The fact that Hamas fighters need water
doesn't justify denying water
from all the civilian population of Gaza.
There is an obligation,
as I said, it's an affirmative
in addition
to everything else
is an affirmative obligation
as an occupying power
that Israel is to make sure water,
medicines, anesthetics, insulin
goes to the people that need it.
If tanks can go in, why can't those tanks
and those soldiers guard aid convoys?
So there's a lot of
deficiencies that give rise
not just to recklessness
or negligence or indifference,
but seems to be part
of a criminal common plan to deny
these objects in dispensing both
to the survival
of the civilian population.
And how many doctors
have to talk about
amputating the limbs of little babies
or children without anesthetic,
or how many people need to die
without insulin,
or how many people with severe burns
can be left
by the doctors
and the different hospitals
because they don't have
antibiotic creams for burns
and they can't save them without that
for us to realize
that the law is being breached.
Now, this is what we have analyzed
and we've presented it for judges
who make the final decision
if warrants should be issued or not.
And again, you say that you have
requested these warrants
based on a higher level of evidence
than is normally required,
not just that it is a reasonable
belief that it could lead
to actual warrants and of charge.
But you believe your evidence has what?
Well, I
when I came in as prosecutor,
the standard for a warrant
are reasonable grounds to believe
that's what the judges have to determine.
I across all our situations,
when I became prosecutor,
I required the leaders in the office,
the heads of the teams
to certify
that there is a realistic prospect
of conviction.
It's not enough in these kinds of cases
to have enough to issue a warrant.
We must be able to bring it home.
On both sides.
And in relation to both, I've determined
and the team are unanimous that we have a
realistic prospect of conviction
in relation to the three warrants
being sought regarding the Hamas leaders
and the two
that are being sought in relation to
Prime Minister Netanyahu
and Foreign Minister Galant.
And of course the judges will decide
if we've got it right
and our analysis is spot on or not.
I'm going to get to the actual
how you effect these warrants,
given the practical
things, the situation in a moment.
But first,
I want to ask you
about the so-called political nature
that many people will claim.
Prime Minister
Netanyahu has already said
ICC charges would be a scandal
on a historic scale,
an indelible stain
on the idea of justice.
Israel's commitment
to international law is unwavering.
And Netanyahu has also said
it would be an anti-Semitic hate crime.
Now, we haven't heard anything from Hamas
about how they would react.
What do you say to that?
There must have been a huge
amount of pressure on you
from all sides to do and not to do.
Well, this court,
Christiane, is a child of Nuremberg.
It was built because of
the awful pictures
that haunt us today of the Shoah
and the gas chambers
and then the Balkans.
And the list goes on.
And
we have to look at the evidence.
And the way I very simply
tried to do things is
look at the evidence,
look at the conduct, look at the victims
and airbrush out the nationality.
And if a crime has been committed,
we should move forward.
Nobody is above the law.
No people by dint of birth or passport,
religion, nationality
or the color of their skin
have a get out of jail
free card, have a free pass
to say what the law doesn't apply to us.
This is a moment
when we see in the shadow of Ukraine
a increasing cacophony of noise,
of double standards and selectivity.
And what we're trying to do
is not go with a tide of emotion,
but take our time, move
as effectively as we can,
but be guided by evidence
and every human life, every baby
that is killed,
whether it's a baby
that's cruelly abducted by Hamas
and killed or a baby
that's been
bombed or killed
or has died in incubators
because of no electricity
or water or food in Gaza
for them, for their families
and for humanity, Humanity.
It's a tragedy.
And this is why we have a court.
It's about the equal application
of the law.
No, people are better than another.
I know people anywhere
are saints.
And so we have to
apply a yardstick of legality to conduct.
We've done that,
and this is why
we've made the applications
that the judges must determine.
I'm going to read you
some heavy criticism
that you've received
from the United States.
As we know,
the United States
is not a party to the ICC, nor is Israel.
Recently,
when word came out
that this may be happening at some point,
US senators and U.S.
Congress people,
mostly Republicans, wrote you
a letter, signed by Senator
Tom Cotton, Mitch McConnell,
Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio, and others.
This is the quote Target Israel
and we will target you
if you move forward with the measures
indicated in the report.
We will move to end all American support
for the ICC, sanction
your employees and associates,
and bar you and your families
from the United States.
You have been warned. Is that a threat?
I think
that's
the plain meaning of it in English.
But, you know,
there's hotheads everywhere
and there's people that are mature
statesmen and stateswoman
and and leaders.
There are those that have fidelity
to something greater than themselves,
whether it's their constitutions.
But ultimately, it's the rule of law.
The good news is,
I think for the last two
and a half years,
we've had very positive engagement
with the Biden administration
in the United States.
We're working
across a range of situations,
whether it's in Ukraine or Darfur.
And I've said to
distinguished members on the Hill
and to the administration
that Rome Statute values
are quintessential American values.
It's against bullying.
It's against the untrammeled power,
against the most vulnerable.
It's the rights,
the dignity
of the individual
is the protection of babies.
I mean, these are fundamental
American values
that should engender bipartisan support.
Now, of course,
this situation, unfortunately,
lives on the San Andreas
Fault of international politics and
strategic interests.
And of
course, I've had some elected leaders
speak to me and very,
you know, be very blunt.
This court is built for Africa
and for thugs like Putin was, what one
senior leader told me.
We don't view it like that.
This court is the legacy of Nuremberg.
This court is a sad
indictment of humanity.
This court should be the triumph of law
over power and brute force.
Grab what you can,
take what you want, do what you will.
And we're going to simply be and
we're not going to be dissuaded
by threats or any other activities,
because in the end,
we have to fulfill our responsibilities
as prosecutors,
as the men and women of the office,
as judges, as registry
to something bigger than ourselves,
which is the fidelity to justice.
And we're not going to be swayed
by the different types of threats,
some of which are public
and some maybe are not.
You mentioned without names
that there are many
who have been indicted
who are not in Democratic states,
who are essentially despots.
Israel is a democracy.
They have a judiciary.
They have law enforcement.
They have elected leaders.
Why do you need to do this
when they have a system
that could do this?
I'd much rather Israel does it.
I mean, Israel, you're right. It has a
very good Supreme Court.
It has very qualified, brilliant lawyers.
But even if you read recently
public information, for example,
in The New York Times,
I think the Bergman and Mazzoli report,
if one goes back to the eighties
and look at the COP report,
a deputy attorney general of Israel,
who said that Israel was unwilling
or unable to investigate crimes
in the occupied territories,
if one looks at the Sassoon report,
if one looks at General,
you have a three star general
that was in Washington, DC between
2019 and 2021
who said there's no accountability.
The simple truth is that
for all the application of the law
in the territory of Israel,
unfortunately it doesn't appear
to be
applied with vigor
or sincerity
in the occupied territories or in Gaza.
And this is why we have to move forward.
Of course, if Israel disagrees,
if they think they are investigating
the same individuals and the same conduct
and the policies that underpinned them,
they are free.
Notwithstanding their objections
to jurisdiction
to raise a challenge
before the judges of the court.
And that's what I advise them to do. But
the simple
truth of the matter
is the disregard of the law
in this situation and the policies
and the utterances
that are coming from the Prime minister,
the minister of defense
support
and corroborate the other evidence
we have from a variety of sources.
I just want to fill in for our viewers.
You mentioned in big New York Times
magazine report this weekend
by Ronen Bergman and Mark Mazzetti,
an eight year effort.
It was titled Unpunished.
And as you say,
it is about the failure
of the Israeli system.
Police, legal and military,
to punish settlers on the occupied West
Bank as they punish
Arab Palestinians on the West Bank.
Now,
you talk about the state of Palestine,
and therefore you have jurisdiction
over things that happen
in the occupied West Bank and Gaza.
There are those who disagree with you.
Clearly, Israel disagrees.
The United States disagrees.
They point out that as yet,
there is no official state of Palestine
recognized by the Security Council.
What is your jurisdiction there?
Well, it's a jurisdiction
that's detailed in the statute,
and that has been decided by majority
by the pretrial chamber.
Leaving aside the
for the moment,
the fact that 141 countries
have recognized Palestine as a state.
In the General.
Assembly, in the General Assembly,
124 states
that make up the Assembly
of State parties
agreed for Palestine to be accepted as a
state party to the Rome Statute.
And so by dint of that,
clearly we have jurisdiction.
The Geneva Conventions
also make it clear that it applies
to high contracting parties.
Israel is a high contracting
party, as is Palestine.
What does that mean?
It means that they have both committed
to comply with the provisions
of the Geneva Conventions.
That includes
the prohibition on starvation
as a method of war.
That includes the prohibition
on taking hostages
or willfully killing or extermination.
I mean, these come from the Rome Statute,
but originally they found form
in the Geneva Conventions.
So we apply the law.
There's been judicial pronouncements
by the
the ICC,
and we have to be guided by those.
The Hamas leaders
who have sought arrest warrants for.
Do you have any hope
that anybody will move against them?
Do you have any hope of
ever getting to them again?
The ICC does not have a police force.
You cannot go and apprehend.
As far as we know,
at least two of them are underground,
potentially in tunnels in Gaza.
And Ismail
Haniya
appears to be
the leader
involved in the political
negotiations, indirect between Israel
and Hamas
with the U.S., Qatar,
other nations mediating.
How do you expect to go after them?
Who do you think is
going to hand them over?
Well, the first thing is
the judge has to rule on the applications
until the judges rule on the application.
All it is is an application
that doesn't have legal effect.
But then states
have such responsibilities
and individuals have choices.
If individuals say that what their
what is alleged is not made out,
it's bunkum.
It's nonsense.
Put your case
before the independent
judges of the court.
This court has had acquittals.
This court has not confirmed cases.
The record shows
that it's a forensic laboratory
in which the evidence
determines
whether or not people are convicted,
cases are confirmed
or cases of kicked out.
That applies to Hamas leaders
if they want.
And if not,
we have to see
what are the other opportunities,
if they're either in Palestine,
which is a state party,
or if they're in Qatar,
which is a non-state party,
but in a way
that's getting ahead of ourselves.
Today,
the announcement is the application
and the judges have to be given the time
to independently
and dispassionately assess
what we've given. Nothing is a given.
They have to assess it
and make a determination
whether or not to issue warrants. But
I also
want to underline the fact that
you mentioned in an earlier question
the allegations of anti-Semitism,
the the hate, the idea that
by applying the law blindly,
we are favoring one side or persecuting
or being hostile to another side,
and nothing can be further
from the truth.
We have so many people of distinction
that are respected
and they independently came in.
I brought them in,
they sat in the evidence review.
And this is not a witch hunt.
This is not some kind
of emotional reaction to noise.
We've been criticized for going
too slowly, criticized
for going too fast.
It's a forensic process
that is expected of us
as international prosecutors,
as an independent court,
to build evidence that is solid,
that will not dissolve in the courtroom.
And that's what we've done
today, is the fulfillment of that
first stage.
This first round of applications
in which we say
we have done our job,
we now give it to the judges
to scrutinize.
So it's not against any people
and it's not against or for any interest.
It's simply
because if we don't
apply the law equally,
we're going to disintegrate as a species.
Of course,
what's happening in the West Bank is
extremely worrying.
It's an issue
also that we are investigating.
But there's a certain
in democracies,
political choices
tend to be determinative.
And all I can say is that Israel,
the leaders, the country, has a choice
that they can engage
and do what is necessary
to meet complementarity.
And the United Kingdom
in the Iraq investigations,
before I was appointed prosecutor,
it was found that there were deficiencies
in the legal system for military justice.
But we have really sincerely looked
at things with a broad horizon,
looking at incriminating
and exonerating evidence equally
looking at evidence,
authenticating the evidence,
and realizing that we're not worth
the job, the title as being a prosecutor
or being lawyers
or having an international
criminal court.
If we are dissuaded because of extraneous
interests from moving forward.
Because end of the day,
I go back to this basic
premise a child in
Myanmar that's
persecuted or a child in Israel
that is an orphan
or that has been taken and killed
or one in Ukraine for their family,
there's no difference.
The universe has been torn to shreds
and this is
the need for the court
and independent judges to scrutinize,
not look at the politics,
not look at a
dysfunctional Security Council,
not look at the difficulties it may cause
a regional organizer, nations
or different groupings,
but simply say, is the evidence reliable?
And if so,
we go back to King John
that the king is under no man
but God under the law.
We all must be subject to that.
Otherwise,
what is this
international rules based system?
What is the principles
of public international law
that so many men and women
have given their lives
for since the Second World
War particularly?
And I think it's a dishonor for them.
It's a dishonor
for the victims of the gas chambers.
If we airbrush out inconvenient truth
and we have to try our best
to achieve justice
for the victims of the 7th of October,
we also must try our best to do justice
for so many innocent people
that are suffering as we speak
in Israel and also in in Gaza,
as well as in other parts of Palestine.
Prosecutor Kerem Hahn, thank
you very much indeed for joining us.
Thank you so much.